[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>We who solve mystery,
become mystery.
Our chemical wisdom handed
down through the ages,
and now graffiti in the
sterile men's toilets
at the Lima airport.
Scrolled, no doubt,
by one of the tourists
waiting out in the food court.
Outside, milling under
the ubiquitous gaze
of security cameras, the
colorful new-age souls,
middle-aged academics,
and passengers
that give you that odd
conspiratorial smile that says,
yes.
We're here for the
shaman conference.
And here we are, chowing down
on McDonald's and Donut King,
getting our last
hits of civilization
before hitting the jungle city
of Iquitos and shamanic boot
camp.
It feels like some whacked
out reality TV show.
The generational snapshot
of a new psychedelic wave
just before it breaks.
Bright-eyed Westerners
about to die
and be reborn in the humid
jungles of Peru, drinking
their hallucinogenic
brew, ayahuasca.
Ayahuasca is a
plant medicine that
has been used by the
indigenous people of South
America for millennia to
heal physical ailments
and, they claim, to cleanse
and purify the spirit.
It was discovered
by the West in 1851,
when the legendary
British botanist Richard
Spruce explored
the Rio Negro basin
and was introduced to the
vine by the Tukanoan Indians.
Spruce gave the vine
its scientific name,
Banisteriopsis Caapi.
In different areas
of South America,
it is also known
as yage or hoasca.
For a while in the
mid-20th century,
chemists who isolated the
active properties of the vine
called their
compound telepathine.
Research showed it contained
various harmala alkaloids,
which are then
boiled up in a brew,
also called ayahuasca, with
a multitude of other plants,
one being the leafy Psychotria
Viridis, which contains
the powerful hallucinogenic
chemical, Dimethyltryptamine,
also known as DMT.
On its own, the
vine is only orally
active at very high doses.
But it does contain potent MAO
monoamine oxidase inhibitors
that overpower the
body's own enzymes
and allow the DMT to potentiate.
Science has made cautious
forays into the jungle
to study the vine in
its native setting.
Or, as with the Huasca
Project in the 1990s,
to study church
members of groups
like the UDV, who
Ayahuasca as part
of their synchratic
Christian jungle religion.
What they found was that
regular ayahuasca use flushed
the brain clean and
improved receptor sites,
suggesting the vine could
be a medicinal goldmine.
But what science cannot explain
is the psychic effect of this
mother of all plants--
the sense of the numinous
and the spiritual world
it reportedly opens up.
Those who drink say that each
ayahuasca journey is unique.
The spirit of the
vine comes alive.
It guides and teaches.
And on the other side,
nothing is ever the same.
Or so they say.
The native men and
women who safeguard
the knowledge of the
vine, and of the spirits
it is said to reveal, are the
curanderos and the curanderas.
Or as the West would
call them, shaman.
Their role has been that of
healer, priest, and traveler
between worlds, acting
as intermediaries
between the spiritual
dimension and this world,
on behalf of their patients.
Yet the demands of the work and
the rise of Western materialism
throughout South
America have seen a fall
in prestige and customers
for the curanderos.
The profession,
usually hereditary,
was in danger of extinction
before an unprecedented wave
of Western gringos started
coming in search of ayahuasca
and the healing it can provide.
Over the last 20 years or
so, a new gringo trail,
this one a journey
of the soul, has
been blossoming in the
jungles of South America.
Seekers and thrill
seekers alike have
been coming from the West for
a reconnection to the deeper
reality shamanism
connects one to,
and bringing back
amazing stories
of hallucinogenic trips,
healing and enlightenment.
Indigenous shamanism has quickly
become the most profitable
business in town, and numerous
jungle lodges and retreats
have sprung up
across South America
to cater to the influx
of rich tourists.
This has spilled over
onto the internet,
as hundreds of
ayahuasca websites,
chat rooms and
forums have emerged
to crystallize a
global subculture
engaging with an indigenous
spiritual practice,
and ceding it back
to the Western world.
And here I was, a 36-year-old
freelance journalist,
reporting on an
academic style gathering
with a pronounced twist.
It was all about
Amazonian shamanism,
with a hands-on component.
With its entrepreneurial blend
of spirituality and capitalism,
the Second Amazonian
Shaman Conference
may be the perfect
mix of paradigms.
It bills itself as a gathering
of curanderos, scientists
and interested members
of the public who
have a yearning for
indigenous spirituality.
Kevin is a long-haired
gringo from San Francisco,
in his late 30s, with angelic
good looks and hazel eyes.
He's been wandering
the world and learning
about indigenous medicines
for over a decade.
Training for two years
in an intensive dieta
with medicinal plants at the
famed Sachamama Ethnobotanical
Gardens outside Iquitos.
Kevin had followed through
on the shaman's path
that I and ayahuasca
seekers like me were just
beginning to tread.
He was a seed brother,
and in his example,
there was a burning promise that
if he could bridge the worlds,
we all could.
The cultural firewall that kept
the shamanic reality separate
from the west could be lifted.
>>In this Amazonian
system, human beings
are trained by the
higher energetic selves
of plants and trees.
As they enter this
process, this process
of shamanic initiation,
if you will,
in the Amazonian system,
basically, the higher
energetic selves, the spirits,
if you will, of the plants
enter into an agreement,
a relationship
with the student,
the human student.
They work on a physical level.
We have a physical
body, but we also
have energetic bodies
associated with the seven
major chakras in our body.
So on an energetic level, the
higher energetic substances,
the spirits of the plants,
come and they heal us.
They remove blockages.
They clean our
soul, if you will.
They also prepare us.
They organize the lines of
energy, the rivers of light
that flow through our body.
They untangle these lines.
And then they help to open
up the center so that we
have different abilities.
For instance, the ability
to talk to plants and trees,
or to see different
vibrational dimensions.
>>Strange to think that
in the first decade
of the 21st century, I'll be
heading to the Peruvian jungle
in search of a connection
to the primal consciousness
that indigenous wisdom revealed.
Yet in a world of global warming
and environmental collapse,
it seemed all the more
urgent to reconnect
with the planet
in a visceral way.
Now days, we are all
part of the story.
And getting down and
dirty in the far crevices
of consciousness was a
prospect I was relishing.
But what was the
business of spirituality
doing to all these
backpacking ayahuasca
seekers that dared to journey
into the mysteries of creation?
And what did it say about
the growing Western need
for an authentic
reconnection to the planet?
Ayahuasca was a mystery to me.
And I got the feeling that
many of the ayahuasca seekers
were in the same boat.
We were all chasing the root of
the vine, eager for the secret
she might provide.
But like children in
the ways of the spirit.
The ayahuasca network
appears to cut across race,
social class and gender.
A secret society
of plant worshipers
all united by the
common experience
of this potent hallucinogenic.
And through them,
the ayahuasca vine
was spreading her
tendrils across the world.
And a genuine archaic
revival was underway.
My bags were packed.
The jungle beckoned.
And the ancient mystery of
the rain-forest awaited.
I wanted in on it.
[CHANTING]
[NATIVE SINGING]
The trail is alive with the
sound of birds, frogs, insects,
and the screech of monkeys deep
inside this fecund landscape.
About 10 minutes in, we cross
over rickety log bridges
strapped together
over a little creek.
A light rain falls, that
evaporates on our skin
as soon as it hits.
I guess this is why they
call it the rain-forest,
I joked to my new
friend, Vance Gellert,
as I help him lug his photo
bags through the lungs
of the earth, the Amazon.
I'm in the jungle at last.
Vance is a photographer.
He studied pharmacology
at university in the '60s.
He's been coming to the Amazon
off and on for three years now,
photographing curanderos
and the native culture
here for a book and
exhibition he's working on.
I've also roped in John
Bowman to our media cell.
A straight talking, bearded
dude from Vancouver,
who's wise beyond his 23 years.
And you turned up back at my
hostel, armed to the teeth
with broadcast quality audio
recording gear to tape shamans.
Soon we arrive at the ceremonial
maloca, a kilometer or so
past the last village.
It's a simple wall-less
hut about 20 feet long,
with a thatched roof
and wooden floorboards,
surrounded by a forest of
eight foot tall plants.
100 meters distant, giant
palm trees tower about,
closing off the outside world.
It looks like an alien
vista, but tonight it
will be our home and sanctuary.
We're drinking with Percy
Garcia, an indigenous curandero
in his early 30s, with shining
skin, short black hair,
and the stocky build
of native Peruvians.
He's been trained
since he was a boy
in the world of the spirits,
and of the great plant
medicine, ayahuasca.
Percy lights mapacho cigarettes
to chase away bad spirits.
They're filled with raw jungle
tobacco, Nicotiana rustica,
with 18% nicotine.
It's getting towards
early evening.
And after we get settled,
Percy takes us down
to the river 100 meters away,
to bath us in flower essences.
Percy bathes our heads,
and blows smoke down
the back of our necks and
over our crown chakras.
It feels like the hot breath
of nightclub smoke machines,
but it's a very
intimate situation.
And as I look up at Percy's
always beaming face,
with his shiny skin
and dark black eyes,
he still looks like
he's just stepped out
of the World Cup football tour.
But he is also a
curandero, a healer.
And I start to realize
the responsibility he has,
that tonight he will lead
us through the subtle zones
of the spirit.
One by one, we are called
up and leave the river.
Baptized into the
ways of the jungle
by the fading dusk light.
As we wander back to the
maloca in the crisp night air,
its thatched frame is
lit by dozens of candles.
It looks like a fairy
house in the jungle.
We take our spots on
the floor and shake out
our sleeping bags.
And Percy's assistant,
Carlos, explains to us
that Percy comes from a
long line of curanderos,
in a tradition where you
were born into the role.
Percy was prepared by his
grandfather, a Banco shaman,
who started grooming
him in the plant
medicines that the age of 10.
He started drinking
ayahuasca at 14,
and learning from other teachers
after his grandfather died,
rising up to become
the village healer.
You don't choose to become
a curandera, Percy says.
And the few that do
will enter the science
because they are
called by spirit.
The night is alive with the
sounds of insects and animals,
like a constant
hum of electricity.
Percy's ceremonial garb
is a curious mishmash
of Western clothes
and indigenous
bling that visually sums up the
changing nature of shamanism.
A tiger t-shirt, silk
spotted pants and sneakers,
a feathered parrot hat with
blue, red, and yellow feathers
offset by Christian rosary
beads and a chakapa leaf fan
in one hand.
He sits behind a makeshift
alter, a wooden box covered
with an intricate, geometrically
patterned cloth like those
the Shipibo women were selling.
The visual trip reports of
the ayahuascan head-space.
The altar is covered
with ceremonial objects,
little rainbow bead dolls,
wooden cups, and about 100
giant mapacho cigarettes.
And last but not
least, in plastic,
two liter San Luis
water bottles,
a thick, dark brown liquid.
Ayahuasca.
The vine of souls.
Ayahuasca is Quechua for
vine of the dead souls.
But at the same
time, as a healer,
we don't call them dead spirits.
We call them allies,
Percy explains
through his interpreter.
Ayahuasca is medicine,
he continues.
It is strength, intelligence,
wisdom, and healing.
In this way, everything is
in accord with tradition.
While nature represents
what life is, ayahuasca is
the mother of us all, he says.
>>You may consider
myself a teacher.
But as a matter of fact, I
consider myself another student
from mother nature.
The doctors are the teachers.
Those who guide me to
perform the healing.
>>Percy doles out the
ayahuasca by torchlight.
And we drink, one by one,
going up to the altar
and taking the medicine
in little wooden bowls.
The brew is dark
and phlegm-life.
And like all medicines,
it tastes foul.
An earthy flavor that
hits the quick of you,
and threatens to come up again.
People burp and rinse
their mouths around me,
as I clench down
the bitter flavor
and breathe through it,
feeling its warmth sink down
into my belly.
The blood of the vine.
Plant medicine to
make you strong.
Keep it down.
Let it pour into you.
Fill you with
plant-human interface.
Outside, the sounds
of the jungle deepen.
Monkeys screech and
parrots call to each other,
and the ubiquitous sound
of insects, as always,
is switched on.
Now, so are we.
As the minutes go by, we
collapse into our mattresses,
and the sound of
vomiting fills the air.
La purga, the natives call it.
The purge.
Racking heaves of spew
usher forth from gringos
all around me, as the ayahuasca
reads their energetic bodies,
finds the sickness within,
and brings it up and out,
sometimes from both ends.
When you are surrounded by
a group of fellow ayahuasca
drinkers in ceremony, their
energies overlap your own.
And as the ayahuasca
heightens your senses,
the sound of gringos drinking,
and vomiting, and rolling
around, can be overwhelming.
Every noise, every word, every
look and breath sinks into you
until you can't look at them.
You need to reel in
your own psychic energy
and contain it
within yourself, not
contaminate it with
other's energies,
no matter how good natured.
[JUNGLE NOISES]
I can feel myself
gently slipping away
into a light trance as
the candles are blown out.
And my last thought is
that we have gone back
to the jungle, back to
the great green womb.
We've returned full circle
from whence we came.
The ayahuasca starts
to come on slow,
snaking in and out like a lover.
Tantalizing me.
The spirit in the plant
is playing hard to get.
Or more likely, she's
finding me hard to get.
She's interfacing,
overlapping energy fields,
as her jungle medicine
comes on strong.
There's a flash of vibrant green
as something starts to happen,
as I fall into
this target window
of curious,
circuitry-like patterns.
Lines of energy that are
called ayahuasca rivers.
Locks deep inside me, that
I never knew were there,
are tumbling open.
And I'm spilling into
the spaces they reveal.
Wrapped inside the mother.
She who nurtures and destroys
in her endless embrace.
All those I love flash
before my mind's eye
in a slow-motion,
emotional retrospective.
I feel like I'm being
unwound and examined.
But I'm not sure
if this is for me,
or for the spirit
of ayahuasca, to get
a quick vibrational
diagnostic on the patient.
I'm an open book
to her gaze, as I
circumnavigate these hot
spaces, and heal the way I
feel to each of my loved ones.
And then, Madre
Ayahuasca shows me
bits of myself
that lay forgotten
or unused, like rooms to a
house I've lived in all my life,
but never entered.
[NATIVE CHANTING]
>>Percy cuts through the
night with his haunting voice,
singing a beautiful
rhythmic chant
that carries healing energy
on the current of its time.
He sings, sweet and
gentle as mother's milk,
like a nursery song sung
to babies while suckling
at their mother's breast.
And then he comes around, and
he blows mapacho smoke over us,
smudging us, shaking loose
any negative into the ether.
[NATIVE CHANTING]
>>>>[SIGHS] I feel
like the ayahuasca
is getting to know me
from the inside out.
But I'm trying to control her.
I'm static and blocking her
ability to come through.
The circuitry
patters come and go
as I struggle with
the vine in me now.
Still holding on and
breathing through the cramps
in my stomach.
And the pressure
building in my bowels.
It's only when all the others
seem to have fallen asleep,
in the wee hours
of the night, can I
bring myself to get
up and creep out
deep into the jungle to purge.
[VOMITING SOUNDS]
As I look up from my vomit,
I can see water particles
hanging in the air, like
a swarm of liquid bees.
Tiny glowing beads of moisture.
Jungle juice.
Glistening amongst
the beads are glowing
mitochondrial-like
amoebas, illuminated
by the light from my head torch.
I can't for the life of me
figure out what they are.
They hang there
preternaturally in the light.
And as I reach out my hand
and wave it in the air,
the beads curl and swirl in
an equal and opposite reaction
to my motion.
And then it hits me.
This is the breath of the
mother, visible, and exhaling
all around.
Ah, God.
The ayahuasca is hitting me
now, changing my perceptions,
deepening my emotional
connection to the web of life.
It's like there's an invisible
thread, and if you pull on it,
the whole picture will unravel,
revealing the true pattern
underneath.
I feel I'm intimately connected
to everything around me
by my vibrational wave front
to that great atomic sea where
we are all one.
Safe in the great
green womb, I'm
remembering what this
connection means, and who
and what we really are.
And it is then that I
realize, as the vine spreads
its tendrils around
the globe, people
have to stop thinking
they are in control,
and sit back and have faith.
Or maybe, I've got
the jungle fever.
[JUNGLE NOISES]
[NATIVE SINGING]
Bowman, Vance, and I walk
under the blue Peruvian sky
and marvel at the
giant cumulonimbus
clouds billowing overhead.
We take some panoramic
shots with our cameras,
capturing everything but
the spirit of this place.
After a few kilometers,
we reach a sign which
reads, "Espiritu de Anaconda."
Walking over wooden
bridges, we pass
the lush, cultured
rain-forest and enter
into a sprawling,
multi-unit complex designed
to cater to Western standards.
The central maloca is
about 30 feet in diameter,
with a conical roof that
reaches almost as high again,
and houses over
two dozen people.
It's booked full tonight with
conference attendees wanting
to drink ayahuasca.
In this Amazonian cathedral,
fully mosquito-proofed,
leave your shoes at
the door, please.
Add a dozen smaller malocas,
guest houses, the dining room
and toilets with
porcelain bowls and doors,
and this starts to feel like
the Club Med of ayahuasca.
Guillermo Arabella is
one of the most famous
Peruvian curanderos, having
starred French filmmaker,
Jan Kounen's feature length
psychedelic spaghetti Western,
"Renegade," which communicated
the visual hallucinations
and experience the spirit
of the vine can bring.
He moved here from
his native Pucallpa,
and built the center
only two years ago,
after money from the movie
gave him the capital to expand.
I saw him at the
shaman conference,
it was a bit like
seeing Tom Cruise
in the flesh for the first
time, and realizing he's shorter
than he seems on the screen.
At five foot two, and stripped
of any robes or ceremony
trappings, Guillermo is a simple
man, with his cropped gray hair
speckled with white,
and a tight lipped smile
across his broad Peruvian face.
In a wall-less hut
behind the main maloca,
one of Guillermo's
helpers is boiling up
crushed ayahuasca
vine and other plants
in a giant
soot-blackened cauldron.
As the flames lick up
and spray into the air,
it resembles a witches pot, with
the attendant in his shorts,
t-shirt and baseball cap.
A plume of thick, gray smoke
billows out, stinging my eyes.
When they clear, I can see the
jungle medicine, ayahuasca,
brewing, bubbling,
writhing with life.
And around the thick
brown vine are green,
admixture leaves that
contain the active DMT.
I get a whiff of the brew,
and it makes me want to vomit.
The surged memory of
ayahuasca washes up,
the taste of my last experience
catching in my throat.
I struggle to force it down.
They say it takes a few years
for the ayahuasca drinker's
body to get used to the brew
and properly acclimatize.
But the soul?
That takes longer.
Sometimes forever.
Ayahuasca is not a drug.
Not in the Western sense.
It cannot be abused like
recreational chemicals
because the taste and
experience is so demanding,
and the hallucinogenic effect
is never the same twice.
Rather, it develops a
relationship with a drinker,
sometimes healing the body,
other times illuminating
the mind.
Or deeper still, taking the
soul on journeys beyond.
But it would do none of this
without the participant putting
effort in.
It's not just, pop the red
pill and escape the matrix.
Serious students have to
give up their Western ways
and embrace a rigorous diet, low
in foods containing tyramine,
a chemical which can react
badly with the MAO inhibiting
properties of the vine.
No red meat, pork, salt, sugar,
fat, caffeine, acetic food,
alcohol, or sex, all of which
affect the body's sensitivity
to ayahuasca.
But tell that to a bunch of
Western thrill seekers looking
for some jungle kicks.
[NATIVE CHANTING]
>>Spoken like a true Jedi.
At sunset, we drink.
And I learned that when you
spend the night in pitch
darkness with a
large group of people
and take ayahuasca,
purging, sweating, dying
and re-birthing
together, you get
to know each other pretty well.
You might not
remember their name,
but afterwards, you remember
their face and the sound
of their suffering.
And they yours.
And there is a special
bond between you.
The candle goes out
and it's pitch black.
A heavy stillness hangs in
the air like a burlap curtain.
Maybe that's the spirits.
Everyone is quiet,
moving around slightly,
the silence of the
moment punctuated
by the inevitable Promethean
heave of another drinker
vomiting.
And as they vomit, up come
all their hurts, their pain,
their suppressions and ills.
I'm starting to come on slow.
A warm, billowing
head-space enlarging
to take in the whole maloca,
and the spirit zone phasing in.
To my left, Bowman darts
forward and crouches
by the round,
plastic bowl placed
at the end of his mattress.
Gripping it with both hands, he
makes a swift, sharp gurgling
sound, and vomits quickly.
I can see his shape and
the outline of his back
in the diffuse
moonlight that shines
through the thick mosquito
nets that surround the maloca.
Heaving over and over,
the spirit of ayahuasca
finding another dark crevice
and bringing it to the light.
There's no point or
focus in this darkness.
No sense of time progressing.
To the unprepared,
this could be hell.
Possessed by a strange
spirit, your body
wracked by wave
after wave of nausea,
vomiting up green bile
in crushing waves.
My head is awash with the
psychic weight of my own mind.
Past loves, mistakes,
issues from my life
all flash before my eyes.
But I'm not sure if my
brain is just hyperactive
or if there's something
deeper going on.
In the darkness, my mind
is up to its old tricks,
trying to imprint form
on the primal chaos.
I want to see snakes and
alligator, jaguar totem
spirits.
And I want it so much my
mind is doing its best.
Grabbing at the shadows and
seeing eyes and slithering,
obsidian dream snakes.
Guillermo's staccato
breath punctuates the dark.
Short, pitched
sounds that strike
like compressed
air darts and cut
through the heavy
atmosphere around us.
It's one of the most eclectic
sounds I've ever heard.
Distinctly sentient, with
an intelligence behind it.
But at the same
time insect-like,
alien, and just beyond the
reach of the conscious mind.
It cuts through the dark,
churning in my consciousness,
as something cracks along
the back of my skull.
Some slight tweak, as
the muscles tighten.
And now I'm feeling
lighter, different.
It's hard to place.
[NATIVE CHANTING]
>>Guillermo is tuning
us in, sinking us
into a shared face space.
The sound is his icaro.
The first wave of
his bag of tricks
to pierce the veil that
separates the worlds.
And viola.
The curtain is pulled
back and we're smeared
across the invisible canvas.
We've arrived.
[NATIVE CHANTING]
>>In the Amazonian cosmo
vision, everything on the earth
has a spirit animating it.
And the bridge between the
Earth and the spirit world
is us, the living things.
By the moonlight, I can see
the wooden beams of the roof
shimmering like a vast spider
web, the central pole flashing
with mythic resonance, like
the world tree of Norse myth,
connecting the Axis Mundi
with the worlds above.
And suddenly, around the
circumference of the roof,
a billion, billion
eyes come into view,
like a shimmering peacock tale,
all veiled behind a dark lens.
They drink me in.
Blink and stare again,
with a reptilian coolness.
Images warping one into another.
I feel like I'm
looking into some sort
of hyper-dimensional mirror.
And that the thing
on the other side
is experiencing what it is
to be human through my eyes,
through all our eyes.
Sometime in the dream,
Guillermo comes around
and blows smoke down
our necks and backs.
He beckons me to lower my
head, not out of respect,
but to cleanse my crown chakra.
And his touch has a gentleness
and a collected strength.
And then, out of
nowhere, the darkness
erupts with a thundering
growl, bigger than us all.
Big enough to hold
the world in its jaws.
Snakes, crocodiles,
writhing anacondas spirits
and jaguar eyes imprint
from my subconscious
under the canvas of the night.
All my fears spewing
forth with them.
The ayahuasca makes urgent
rumbles in my belly.
And as a wave of
nausea washes over me,
I must have the fortitude
to stand and grope my way
through the dark to the door.
Mercifully, it opens.
And I push it and stumble
out into the night,
punch drunk with the
spirit of the vine in me,
threatening to come up quick.
The silhouetted jungle is bathed
in a silver spectral light,
as Peruvian helpers
stationed outside the door
point me towards the toilets.
A shimmering ball of light.
Only 20 meters away.
It seems to skip in
my field of vision.
My whole body feels
like it's under water,
that my consciousness
trying to drive it
is doing so from very far
away and under challenging
circumstances.
After an eternity on the
path, lost in the trees,
I finally find my way to the
toilets and an empty cubicle.
The porcelain bowl
and seat is a miracle.
And as I'm bathed in the bright,
artificial light, the ayahuasca
in me judges all is ready.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
A violent rush of
vomit erupts from me
and into the basin
next to the toilet.
And then another, and
another, and another.
My whole body is gripped
with peristalsis,
and squeezing out sickness.
[VOMITING SOUNDS]
As I cough and
splutter over the sink,
and try to hang
on to the shifting
space-time co-ordinates around
me, a trick of the light
draws my attention to the warm
sick backed up in the sink.
Still bubbling like a fizzy
drink, like ayahuasca cola.
But it has a curious,
unpleasant film to it,
like oil rainbows on water.
The eyes from the other
side of the mirror.
A magic mirror, perhaps,
created from my ayahuasca vomit.
And as I look into the magic
mirror, the eyes become spots.
The spots move with the
shape of a large cat.
A jaguar stalking the jungle.
He stops in front of
a grandfather tree,
with thick snakes of flowering
ayahuasca vine twining
around its frame, and looks
back, as if he can see me.
And suddenly pounces, muscle
rippling and claws extended.
And he shreds the
thick vine into shards,
and starts nibbling
on the leaves.
Then he starts tripping
out, rolling around
with glazed eyes.
And then he's vomiting, too.
And I realize it's me.
Me in the jaguar skin.
And it me who's vomiting
once again into the sink.
I meet my fears,
and they devour me.
With another roar of the jaguar
god, melts the realization.
It's the thunder of a
jumbo jet dead overhead.
The 10 PM flight back to
Lima, back to civilization.
And as the hallucinogenic
jungle envelops me,
I start to wonder if I can
ever come back from this,
ever return to
civilization as I left it.
Or if something inside me
now is changed forever.
And the jaguar is the one who
stalks the world in my skin.
But there is no
turning back now.
No off switch.
Just me alone with the universe,
and the jaguar in the forest.
Two crazy,
cross-species trippers
sharing a cosmo vision
that says we are both one.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Early Friday
morning, Ron Wheelock
drives me out to his house in
his three-wheeled motorcarro,
his 3 and 1/2 year old
son, Kato, in the back.
The wind in his face,
loving every minute of it.
It all feels so "Easy
Rider," cruising down
the Iquitos Norta highway in
search of the ultimate mystery.
As we get out at Ron's
place, I notice a carved sign
above the gates, adorned with
wooden flowers that reads
"La Rosacita," the rosy cross.
With a little red love heart
dotting the "i" in Rosacita.
Maybe it's having
young Kato here,
or the good vibe I get off Ron
and his down to earth manner.
But this place immediately feels
like home, where the heart is.
Ron's a weathered
gringo in his early 50s,
with a worn down,
weather-beaten look,
like he's just stepped out
of a John Steinbeck novel.
He's an old-time boy from Kansas
who's always been interested
in shamanism.
So one day back in '96,
he decided to come to Peru
and find himself a teacher.
The first curandero
he drank with
was Don Jose Corale Mori,
a renowned local healer
and a Banco shaman.
A master of sky, water,
land, and spirits.
He took him under his wing
and taught him the ways
of the jungle medicine.
And now, Ron practices
as the gringo shaman
to a growing clientele
of Western seekers.
[NATIVE CHANTING]
>>Anybody's done much work
with ayahuasca will tell you.
We don't choose to
drink ayahuasca.
She chooses us.
And I find that very true.
So, you know, there's
hallucinogenic plants
all over the face of the earth.
Peyote, San Pedro, the
Syrian ruse, opium.
All of these plants.
I see these plants selecting
their caretakers, the teachers.
In my opinion, we're
caretakers of the earth.
They need us.
I see ayahuasca as all vines.
The vine starts
growing or something.
It just tries to
take over everything.
And ayahuasca is also a vine.
And through us,
each ayahuascara,
we're another limb of the vine.
And she's trying to
embrace the world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>The smell of ayahuasca
wafts through the house
as we all drop our
bags inside and take
stock of our surroundings.
Past the living room, with
its skins and trappings,
is a thick wooden picnic table
in the dining room, which
doubles as an altar
space when Ron
conducts ayahuasca ceremonies.
The ayahuasca is
boiling in a big,
shiny chef's pot on the stove.
It's dark surface
bubbling a green froth.
Unlike most shamans that
work with ayahuasca,
Ron also works with 5-MeO-DMT.
Amy Now, just because
someone works with ayahuasca,
doesn't mean they would
choose to work with DMT.
They're two streams that
lead to the same source,
and both have to
be use sacredly,
with the right intent, which
Ron brings to the work.
Despite its powerful
psychedelic effects,
5-MeO-DMT is not
illegal at this time.
That may be because
the chemical is
native to the brain in both
humans and throughout nature.
And it's also
rapidly metabolized.
Ron's friend, Dr. Juan claims
to be a research scientist
from the University
of Washington,
currently doing
neuropharmacology research.
And to be honest, as he
sets up his laptop, loaded
with 5 grand of
proprietary software
that analyzes QUEEG Quantitative
Electroencephalogram scans,
it never occurs to me
to question otherwise.
A classic mad scientist
on the frontiers
of consciousness, who's traded
his castle for a thatched hut,
and his lab coat for
Bermuda shorts and beads.
Dr. Juan reads the brain
waves, and shaman Ron
supplies the smokable 5-MeO-DMT
that catapults seekers
into the deep reaches of
inner space, like a tag team
the unites the modern with the
archaic, science and shamanism.
So sure.
Wire me up, and fire me
into the mind of God.
It's all in the name
of science, after all.
There's something
curious about DMT
and all its analogs
which are found
throughout many of
nature's creatures,
in a swath of plants
and toads species.
Renowned psychedelic chemist,
Alexander Sasha Shulgin,
claims in his book,
"Tihkal, Tryptamines
I Have Known and Loved," that
"DMT is in this flower here,
in that tree over there,
and in yonder animal.
It is most simply, almost
everywhere you choose to look."
The mechanism of DMT is believed
to be intimately connected
to consciousness itself,
where its similarity
to the neurotransmitter,
serotonin,
allows it to bond to both
serotonin and novel signal
receptors in the
brain, and trigger
hallucinogenic activity.
Some medical researchers,
like J.C. Callaway
of the University of
Kuopio in Finland,
believe it may be
involved in producing
the visual hallucinations
we experience in dreaming.
Dr. Rick Strassman, who wrote
the book, "DMT, The Spirit
Molecule," about
his legal research
with volunteers taking DMT
at the University of New
Mexico in the
1990s, also suggests
that a surge of DMT its released
from the pineal gland at peak
experiences like birth,
the point of death,
or a near-death experience.
This may also explain
spontaneous contact experiences
throughout the West, whether
that be with angels or aliens.
Entheogenic advocate,
Terence McKenna,
said that, "DMT is
utterly idiosyncratic,
in that the experience is so
bizarrely alien it is almost
beyond our comprehension.
And yet, it is beyond
our comprehension
precisely because we don't
have the words for it."
>>You smoke it, and it comes
on in about 15 seconds.
You essentially fall
back, unconscious.
Your eyes are closed.
And you hear a sound
like ripping cellophane,
like someone crumbling up Saran
Wrap or something like that,
and throwing it away.
A friend of mine says this is
your radio entelechy ripping
out of the organic matrix.
And you hear a tone.
One of these ascending
[CRESCENDO-ING NOISE] This kind
of thing.
And then there is the normal
hallucinogenic drug modality,
which is a shifting geometric
surface of migrating
into changing colored forms.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>To capture the
data, Juan's going
to strap on an electro-cap
laced with 19 electrodes,
wet with gel, that
conduct the brain's
own electrical activity.
And pop the data
through a rainbow bus
code that will connect
me to the computer.
Dr. Juan is finished fitting the
skullcap, and I'm all wired up.
The cap has 19
placements, and they
cover the frontal, temporal, and
central regions of the brain,
he explains.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Bowman sets up his video
camera, and plays with Kato,
as Vance positions his own
photography gear in the light.
Juan puts little foam
circles over my eyes,
and lowers the blindfold,
reducing the eye movement
and the artifacts.
He also checks the noise
that the contracting muscles
of the skull, the jaw, and the
face create in EEG readings.
In the pitch black, the
scream of my mind calms down,
and the EEG readings even now.
Perfect, Juan says.
He's watching the streaming
waves of peaks and troughs
on his laptop screen, and
recording at 50 micro-volts.
And it strikes me, then,
how odd this all is.
To be in the jungles
of Peru, about
to smoke a plant extract
responsible for deep spirit
journeys, administered
by a Western shaman,
and wired to a computer
reading my brain waves.
And the whole thing
filmed for posterity,
like the launch of a
manned mission to the moon.
Our DIY jungle psycho-nautics
into the inner space ways,
have the low-budget,
cutting edge feel
of the Apollo missions, of
the days when astronauts
were exploring new frontiers
and changing the world
with their discoveries.
[ELECTRONIC SOUNDS]
In the dark of my
mind's eye, I can
hear the sound of chickens
in the yard outside,
and I know it's time.
We're ready to launch.
[BEEPING]
Ron passes the glass
pipe to my lips,
and I grip the
smooth weight of it.
He lights it and I
toke, slow when strong,
letting the DMT smoke into me.
A soft numbness
comes into my mouth,
like the taste of
burning plastic,
as my reality grid starts
to melt into another space.
I can feel the hot
jungle air all around,
as a wash of 5-MeO-DMT rushes
to the synaptic pathways
in my brain.
And as I fall backwards
into the pillows,
and the smoke curls
down my throat,
the rabbit hole
falls away under me.
And from here on in,
it's all words, yeah?
As I go under,
kaleidoscopic images
fill the screen of my vision.
And as each geometric shape
overlaps into the next,
I'm rocking the vibe.
It's reading me,
and I'm reading it.
Both of us, melting
into each other,
in that sacred space where
the heart of all consciousness
resides.
This space fills me, and
it feels like I'm drowning.
But it's not water.
It's something else entirely.
Energy.
A consciousness independent
and larger than me.
And that consciousness
is drinking me in,
and getting inside
me at the same time,
or filling the negative
spaces with its essence.
Stripping away
layers of illusion
to reveal itself
always within me.
Part of my mind is still
on automatic pilot,
experiencing all this, and
deconstructing and processing
it as best I can, while the
other part just hangs on
for dear life at the
rushing, cannon ball surge
into this thing.
It is, as '60s hippie scientist,
philosopher, and author
Alan Watts once described,
load universe into cannon.
Aim at brain.
Fire.
[ELECTRONIC SOUNDS]
It's the raw heart
of creation here,
and it recognizes and absorbs
your consciousness back
to the source.
The Hindus believe that in
the beginning was sound.
A pure vibrational ohm.
And as I surf these
wave emanations,
I feel like I've locked onto
the fundamental frequency.
Seconds go by on the outside,
but inside, it's eternity.
Outside time and space, and
back to where it all began.
Twenty seconds in,
the first stirring
of inter-species
communion registers.
It's like a lover.
A smile breaks across my face
as I recognize where I am again.
Holy mother of God.
I'm melting into it.
Falling, and I can't
go deep enough.
It just goes on
forever, and ever.
Amen.
[MOANING]
[ELECTRONIC SOUNDS]
As I go with that energy,
I melt further into it,
and the signal gets stronger.
It becomes me.
And I make the sound back at it.
A broadcaster myself,
as well as a receiver.
I'm groaning like I'm
coming, but on the inside
where it's outside,
and where it's all it.
It's it.
And there are no other
words, to suffice.
We are all it.
It is it.
The dense heart of a star in
our heads, and it knows me
and I know it.
Wave after wave
of energy, and I'm
breaking through an infinite
kaleidoscopic matrix
of pure unadulterated
consciousness.
The current of life is
streaming through me,
and it's like a
brain wave of God.
And I'm surfing it.
Surfing God's wave.
Somewhere within, I
can feel the broadcast
of a patent signal,
a cosmic heart beat,
like the pulse of life from
a baby within the mother.
The feeling keeps flowing
as I break through layers
and pop dimensional membranes.
And there is no fear,
no holding back.
Just pure consciousness
merging where
it came from, the Godhead.
The over-mind.
Mother.
Matrix.
Union.
Two minutes in godhead,
and I'm still surfing
the vibrational waves of bliss.
I'm shaking, trembling.
My legs vibrating
like those of cicadas,
as they make their high pitched
wave forms in the night.
And Ron, and Juan both hold
me down as my flesh body
rolls about.
It's insectoid consciousness.
The same vibrational patterns
that are shaking my body
connect the insects
to the source.
And the sound you hear
from them every night,
as they sing their
song of creation
is the sound of God
coming through them.
The insects know.
They hear.
The receive the signal
and transmit it on.
The Buddhists and
other holy men state
that the whole
purpose of being alive
is to cultivate consciousness
and lock in the ability
to remain lucid in
the after-death state.
To transcend the body and retain
awareness in the lower bardo
frequencies where the larger
cosmic playground begins.
And the more I be,
the more I sit back
and melt into the Godhead,
the more it melts into me.
It builds.
It melts.
It becomes.
Deeper, deeper,
deeper like a wave.
The Sufis say there are
50,000 veils of illusion,
or Maya between you and God.
But none between God and you.
And right now, I
know with a certainty
that all of those
layers are alive.
And they're not
veils, but filters
that sift the soul, stripping
it of heavy vibrational
frequencies, and purifying it
enough to be able to interface
with the source.
[SLOW LAUGHTER]
See.
Whoo!
Yeah.
[GIBBERISH]
[SCREAMING]
Later, as I watched the video
Bowman took of the event,
I can see that I look like a
mental patient being held down,
about to foam at the mouth, and
expressing pure ur-language.
Letting it out of me.
Heaven on earth pouring
through me like molten sound.
Primal glossolalia pouring
out of me like water,
riding the vibrational
waves of sound.
Channeling it.
I'm spewing out sound.
[GIBBERISH] OK.
John, I hope you're
getting this.
>>I got it.
Ho, ho, ho.
Holy shit.
>>[GIBBERISH] OK.
I'm on.
>>Now, try and be
very still, and we
can record a little longer, OK.
Because we had to stop because
there was too much movement.
>>Thank you.
I don't know the words.
But of course, he can only
film the outside experience.
And the inside is
where the miracle
is as fresh as a new day.
Older things on the inside
that can't be put into words
because they are word.
The word made flesh.
[GIBBERISH]
I can't stop tapping my
leg up and down, moving
my fingers in fluid mantras.
Vibrating, singing,
trans-linguisticizing,
like a baked potato hot
out of the microwave,
and still radiating the
frequency of heaven.
>>Yes?
>>If only I had the Spanish.
>>What's that?
Spanish?
>>Oh, oh, oh, oh.
Oh, my god.
[LAUGHTER]
>>Oh, ho.
Oh, ho.
[LAUGHTER]
>>Relax.
Relax, relax, relax, relax.
>>It's it.
That was it.
>>Oh, shit.
>>OK, relax, relax.
[GIBBERISH]
[LAUGHTER]
>>It's fluid.
You know what I mean?
It's it.
There's nothing but it.
It's self-reflective code.
>>Yes.
>>But how does it get to
be self-reflective code?
And God.
Yeah.
>>Oh, shit.
>>I love it.
He loves me.
We're it.
>>Yes.
>>I'm coming down.
It's all words now.
>>Yes.
>>But it was fluid.
It's just, it's the main line.
But it's scared going in because
you've got cultural imprints
and layers.
But it's the heart.
But the weird thing
is, how is it just it?
How is it it, without
not being you?
I feel like I've just
been hit by lightning.
Liquid language lightning.
The word of God.
All your you melts away till
there's nothing left but it.
And you are it.
And it is it.
And on, and on, and on in
perfect, radiating super-union.
But what the fuck is it?
[NATIVE SINGING]
Ollantaytambo is an ancient
Inca fortress temple,
nestled in the Urubamba
valley, surrounded on all sides
by languid mountains that
break against the sky.
The base of the
mountains are strewn
with plantation terraces,
made from finely cut stones,
with ruined forts, temples,
and battlements further up
the incline that hint at the
mountain civilization that
existed here in its prime,
almost 3,000 meters above sea
level.
Some ruins are perched on
such isolated juts of rock
that it seems as if they must
have sprouted here organically.
For surely no human
hand could build them
on the hips of these
towering giants.
But the Incas did.
By the time the Spanish
conquistadors sacked
Cuzco in 1535, Maco Inca,
the emperor of the time,
retreated to
Ollantaytambo, where
he used its strategic
location, including
the fortified gates
and guard houses
and the naturally state
slopes and vertical walls,
to temporarily hold back
the Spanish invaders.
500 years later, the
invaders are unstoppable,
decked out with sun hats,
video cameras, water bottles
and backpacks.
Constant streams of
touristos pile out
of a fleet of super-size
tall buses that
have pulled up in the car park.
There must be hundreds
of people here,
all desperately looking for some
relief from the late morning
sun, studying their
maps and guide books
as they prepare to brave the
cobblestone street gauntlet,
past all the handicraft
sellers, and head down
towards the main section of town
to really get their ruins on.
I'm here with Kevin
Furnas, the American shaman
I met back in Iquitos
at the conference,
and two of his apprentices,
Mira and Ricardo,
a Peruvian in his
40s with sharp eyes,
bushy black eyebrows, and
puffy cheeks like a puma.
So, what's the plan?
Well, I thought we'd avoid
the usual tourist traps down
by the terraces, in
the Temple of the Sun,
and climb old Pinkuylluna
Hill up here, Kevin says.
Look, can you see
the face, he cries,
pointing towards the
side of the mountain.
The locals say we Viracocha,
their creator god.
He came down to earth
on a little island
in the center of Lake Titicaca,
called the Island of the Sun.
And everywhere he
walked, he created form,
imbuing everything
with his essence.
He made humans from the clay,
and they built the temples
here, that trace the
path of the sky god
as he walked across the
mountains to the sea
and back again, creating
the sacred valley.
I've got to tell
you, like [SIGHS] I
can feel the energy
of the mountain.
I can't believe
how sensitive I've
become to energy itself
in these last few weeks,
ever since I left the jungle.
Right.
Well, you know.
All the visionary plant is
doing is taking the filters
off the chakras, so you can
see directly, Kevin begins.
>>Well, it's not
ayahuasca visions.
You're just seeing
reality the way it is.
>>Yeah, yeah.
>>Ayahuasca helps you.
Ayahuasca will be different
than wachuma/ San Pedro.
Different effect.
But ultimately, if you're seeing
energy, you're seeing energy,
you know?
Whether it's in a dream, with a
plant, or with nothing at all.
Here in the Andean
system, if you
talk to the caros, the keepers
of the sacred knowledge,
they don't traditionally
used San Pedro, ayahuasca,
or other plants.
The system that they use is
they see energy without it.
>>They were said to have
lived in the highlands of Peru
for thousands of years.
And they hadn't been defeated
by the pre-Incas, the Incas,
or the conquistadors, so
their culture was intact.
It was funny.
My journey had led
me all this way
up a sacred mountain
to remind me
that the finger that points at
the sun is not the sun itself.
Ayahuasca, all the shamanic
accoutrements, all those
were powerful allies, indeed.
But they were just
activating what we all
have inside us all along.
The innate ability
to see and connect
with the energetic
grids of the universe.
The energy ayahuasca and the
stones connect to, it's here.
It's everywhere, isn't it?
It's the energy of the
planet, and the stars,
and the infinite.
Right, Kevin says,
smiling at me warmly
while he smokes his mapacho.
The Inca's call it Kausay
Pacha, the energy universe,
he tells us.
It's the ability to perceive
this invisible world that
means your heart chakra
and your third eye
are connected on
an energetic level.
And with that, we
continue our climb.
A few hundred meters
up on the left
is a squat block on
the edge of a bluff.
A little ruined fort,
balanced precariously
on the edge of the abyss.
Directly above,
Viracocha's stony head.
And peering down into
the endless free-fall
of the valley blood.
Ollantaytambo spreads itself
out beneath us like a lover.
The rolling fields
unfolding one into another,
hugged by mountains.
I understand, then, what
the Incas must have felt.
The living presence
of the Earth itself,
which they call Pachamama.
The more I tuned into it,
the more spatially aware
I became of the open landscape
as a living organism,
connected to the clouds and sky,
and up into the heavens above.
[FLUTE MUSIC]
The caro's prophecies
specifically
say that a great change is now
upon the world, which they call
Pachacuti, a time in
which the world will
be turned right side up,
and harmony and order
will be restored.
According to the caros,
the last Pachacuti
occurred over 500 years ago,
when the Spanish invaders
conquered the Incan
empire, breaking
the celestial connection
woven across the land,
in the temples and
shrines, and chaos reigned.
Patiently, the caros
have waited for the time
their prophecies predicted.
>>In the past, a
shaman would be living
in a small tribal village,
working with a small community.
Now we're on an
international level.
Bear in mind that,
as human beings,
this is the first time
we're on a planetary level.
In the past, we'd
go kill each other.
Tribes, nations, empires.
This is the first time
we're on a world scale.
So it's not just about
individual evolution.
It's about a
planetary evolution.
When we work together
in cooperative molds,
we can change the
dream of this planet.
>>That's why we've all been
drawn here, Kevin says, sagely.
Our energy bodies are awakening
to a deeper understanding
of the true nature of reality.
Down there, Kevin says, pointing
towards civilization below us,
with a grand sweep
of his hand, we're
in normal physical reality.
We have filters that
adjust our perception.
And this is why every
culture in the world
has different views
on how reality is.
The path of shamanism is
like climbing this mountain,
he continues.
This world is a school, but
life's not just about learning.
It's about remembering.
At one time, we knew everything.
But when we come down here,
they blank out your memory.
When you take the filters off,
with tools like ayahuasca,
you see the greater
reality, he continues.
The key is to remember.
Remember.
And I do.
Beneath the flesh is a spiritual
body that comes, like the Inca,
from the sun.
But not the sun up
there in the sky.
There's another sun
that lies within,
and it burns with the
fire of a spiritual light.
Our souls are like emanations
from this central source.
It's where we come from,
and where we go back to.
Andean prophecy foretells of
the Taripaypacha or encounter
with the universe, he says.
It refers to a new golden
era in the human experience.
The age of meeting
ourselves again.
And then, through the gateway
of Viracocha's crown, far off
in the sky, I
suddenly spy two birds
sailing through a sea of blue.
Two eagles, perhaps.
Condors.
Or both.
They're too far away to tell.
But either way, I can
read the omen clearly.
The time of the
prophecies is upon us.
These are the times, indeed,
when all the binaries converge.
North and south,
eagle and condor,
old world and new, heaven
and earth, past and future.
And we are all part of it.
All part of the
universal awakening.
[MUSIC - DARPAN, "PEACE
INVOCATION"]
[LEAVES RUSTLING]
[SINGING IN FOREIGN LANGUAGE]